added script for GCP user management (#251)
devonfw/hangar: documentation/gcloud/setup-account-iam.asciidoc

== Prerequisites

* A Google Cloud account.

==== Required predefined roles

Find them on `/scripts/accounts/gcp/gke-predefined-roles.txt`.

```
roles/source.admin
...
```

==== Required custom roles

Find them on `/scripts/accounts/gcloud/gke-custom-role.yaml`.

== Setting up a principal (Google Account, service account) using provided script

The script located at `/scripts/accounts/gcloud/setup-principal-account.sh` will automatically attach the specified roles to the principal, in the context of the provided project.

=== Usage
```
setup-principal-account.sh \
  -g <Google Account> \
  -s <Service Account Name> \
  -p <project ID> \
  [-r <roles...>] \
  [-f <roles file path>] \
  [-c <custom role file path>] \
  [-i <custom role id>]
```

=== Flags
```
-g      [Required] Google Account of an end user. Mutually exclusive with -s.
-s      [Required] Service Account name. Mutually exclusive with -g.
-p      [Required] Short project name (ID) to which the principal will be enrolled.
-r                 Roles (basic or predefined) to be attached to the principal in the project, splitted by comma.

> -f                 Path to a file containing the roles (basic or predefined) to be attached to the principal in the project.
> -c                 Path to a YAML file containing the custom role to be attached to the principal in the project. Requires -i.
> -i                 ID to be set to the custom role provided in -c.
> ```
> 
> === Example
> ```
> ./setup-principal-account.sh -s ExampleServiceAccount -p ExampleProject -r roles/viewer,roles/editor -f ./gke-predefined-roles.txt -c gke-custom-role.yaml -i gke-custom-role
> ```
> NOTE: "ExampleProject" project must exist.
> 
> NOTE: Required roles for using GKE are located at `/scripts/accounts/gcloud/gke-predefined-roles.txt` and `/scripts/accounts/gcloud/gke-custom-role.yaml`
> 
> === After execution
> On success, the newly created bindings for user in the project will be shown as output:
> ```
> Attaching provided roles in file gke-predefined-roles.txt to principal in project ExampleProject...
> Attached role roles/viewer to serviceAccount:ExampleServiceAccount@ExampleProject.iam.gserviceaccount.com in project ExampleProject.
> Attached role roles/editor to serviceAccount:ExampleServiceAccount@ExampleProject.iam.gserviceaccount.com in project ExampleProject.
> Attached role roles/source.admin to serviceAccount:ExampleServiceAccount@ExampleProject.iam.gserviceaccount.com in project ExampleProject.
> 
> ```
> 
> == Checking roles and permissions of a principal (Google Account, service account) using provided script
> 
> The script located at `/scripts/accounts/gcloud/verify-principal-roles-and-permissions.sh` will automatically check the roles and permissions bound to the principal, in the context of the provided project.
> 
> === Usage
> ```
> verify-principal-roles-and-permissions.sh \
>   -g <Google Account> \
>   -s <Service Account Name> \
>   -p <project ID> \
>   [-r <roles...>] \
>   [-f <roles file path>] \
>   [-e <permissions...>] \
>   [-i <permissions file path>]
> ```
> 
> === Flags
> ```
> -g      [Required] Google Account of an end user. Mutually exclusive with -s.
> -s      [Required] Service Account name. Mutually exclusive with -g.
> -p      [Required] Short project name (ID) where the roles and permissions will be checked.
> -r                 Roles to be checked, splitted by comma.
> -f                 Path to a file containing the roles to be checked.
> -e                 Permissions to be checked, splitted by comma.
> -i                 Path to a file containing the permissions to be checked.
> ```
> 
> === Example
> ```
> ./verify-principal-roles-and-permissions.sh -s ExampleServiceAccount -p ExampleProject -r roles/viewer,roles/editor -f ./gke-predefined-roles.txt -i ./gke-required-permissions.txt
> ```
> NOTE: "ExampleProject" project must exist.
> 
> After execution, provided policies will be shown preceded by an `OK` or `FAILED` depending on the attachment status.
> 
> NOTE: Required roles for using GKE are located at `/scripts/accounts/gcloud/gke-predefined-roles.txt`
> NOTE: Required permissions for using GKE are located at `/scripts/accounts/gcloud/gke-required-permissions.txt`

Reviewer: ````suggestion
= Setup Google Cloud account IAM
The scope of this section is to prepare a Google Cloud account to be ready for setting up a Cloud Dev & Run environment later on. By the end of this guide, a Principal (existing end user account or new/existing service account) will be enrolled to an existing project with the required roles attached.

== Prerequisites

* Have a Google Cloud project already setup and Google Cloud CLI installed and configured. If it is not the case, please go back to corresponding guide.
* A Google Cloud account with owner privileges on the project.

=== Alternative

In case you do not have an account or it does not have owner privileges on the project, request a service account to your Google Cloud administrator asking for the following roles being attached. Then go to <<check-roles-and-permissions-of-a-principal>>.

==== Required predefined roles

Find them on `/scripts/accounts/gcloud/predefined-roles.txt`.

== Setting up a principal using provided script

The script located at `/scripts/accounts/gcloud/setup-principal-account.sh` will automatically attach the required roles to the principal, in the context of the provided project.

=== Usage
```
setup-principal-account.sh \
  -g <google account> \
  -s <service account name> \
  -p <project id> \
  [-r <roles...>] \
  [-f <roles file path>] \
  [-c <custom role file path>] \
  [-i <custom role id>]
```

=== Flags
```
-g      [Required] Google Account of an end user. Mutually exclusive with -s.
-s      [Required] Service Account name. Mutually exclusive with -g.
-p      [Required] Short project name (ID) to which the principal will be enrolled.
-r                 Roles (basic or predefined) to be attached to the principal in the project, splitted by comma.
-f                 Path to a file containing the roles (basic or predefined) to be attached to the principal in the project.
-c                 Path to a YAML file containing the custom role to be attached to the principal in the project. Requires -i.
-i                 ID to be set to the custom role provided in -c.
```

=== Example
```
./setup-principal-account.sh -s ExampleServiceAccount -p ExampleProject -f ./predefined-roles.txt
```

NOTE: Required roles are located at `/scripts/accounts/gcloud/predefined-roles.txt`.

TIP: You can find an example of a custom role at `/scripts/accounts/gcloud/custom-role-example.yaml`.

=== After execution
On success and in case of creating a new service account (as in the example), a `key.json` file containing credentials will be generated. It will be used on further steps for authenticating with Google Cloud without human intervention.

IMPORTANT: It is mandatory to store the `key.json` file securely at this point, as *it will not be retrievable again*.

== Check roles and permissions of a principal

The script located at `/scripts/accounts/gcloud/verify-principal-roles-and-permissions.sh` will automatically check that the necessary roles and permissions are bound to the principal, in the context of the provided project.

=== Usage
```
verify-principal-roles-and-permissions.sh \
  -g <google account> \
  -s <service account name> \
  -p <project id> \
  [-r <roles...>] \
  [-f <roles file path>] \
  [-e <permissions...>] \
  [-i <permissions file path>]
```

=== Flags
```
-g      [Required] Google Account of an end user. Mutually exclusive with -s.
-s      [Required] Service Account name. Mutually exclusive with -g.
-p      [Required] Short project name (ID) where the roles and permissions will be checked.
-r                 Roles to be checked, splitted by comma.
-f                 Path to a file containing the roles to be checked.
-e                 Permissions to be checked, splitted by comma.
-i                 Path to a file containing the permissions to be checked.
```

=== Example
```
./verify-principal-roles-and-permissions.sh -s ExampleServiceAccount -p ExampleProject -f ./predefined-roles.txt
```

After execution, provided policies will be shown preceded by an `OK` or `FAILED` depending on the attachment status.

NOTE: Required roles are located at `/scripts/accounts/gcloud/predefined-roles.txt`

TIP: You can find a non-comprehensive example of required permisions at `/scripts/accounts/gcloud/required-permissions-example.txt`.
````
